#summary How to install and run include what you use
#labels Featured,Phase-Deploy

= Include What You Use  =

"Include what you use" means this: for every symbol (type, function,
variable, or macro) that you use in foo.cc (or foo.cpp), either foo.cc
or foo.h should #include a .h file that exports the declaration of
that symbol. (Similarly, for foo_test.cc, either foo_test.cc or foo.h
should do the #including.)  Obviously symbols defined in foo.cc itself
are excluded from this requirement.

This puts us in a state where every file includes the headers it needs
to declare the symbols that it uses.  When every file includes what it
uses, then it is possible to edit any file and remove unused headers,
without fear of accidentally breaking the upwards dependencies of that
file.  It also becomes easy to automatically track and update
dependencies in the source code.

= CAVEAT =

This is alpha quality software -- at best
(as of February 2011).  It was written to work
specifically in the Google source tree, and may make assumptions, or
have gaps, that are immediately and embarrassingly evident in other
types of code.  For instance, we only run this on C++ code, not C or
Objective C.  Even for Google code, the tool still makes a lot of
mistakes.

While we work to get IWYU quality up, we will be stinting new
features, and will prioritize reported bugs along with the many
existing, known bugs.  The best chance of getting a problem fixed is
to submit a patch that fixes it (along with a unittest case that
verifies the fix)!

= How to Build =

You will need the clang and llvm trees on your system, such as by
[http://clang.llvm.org/get_started.html checking out] their SVN trees.
   
Then [http://code.google.com/p/include-what-you-use/downloads/list download] the include-what-you-use tarball and unpack it your
`/path/to/llvm/tools/clang/tools` directory:
{{{
   llvm/tools/clang/tools$ tar xfz include-what-you-use-<version>.tar.gz
}}}
Or, alternately, get the project directly from
[http://code.google.com/p/include-what-you-use/source/checkout svn]:
{{{
   llvm/tools/clang/tools$ svn co http://include-what-you-use.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/ include-what-you-use
}}}

  # Edit tools/clang/tools/Makefile and add include-what-you-use to the DIRS variable.
  # Edit tools/clang/tools/CMakeLists.txt and add_subdirectory(include-what-you-use)
  # 'cd' into the build directory (the directory you ran llvm/configure from) and type 'make'

Include what you use makes heavy use of clang internals, and will
occasionally break when clang is updated.  See the include-what-you-use Makefile for instructions on how to keep them in sync.

== How to Build on Windows ==

(These instructions are compliments Philip Craig.)

  # Build LLVM and Clang as it says to on the [http://clang.llvm.org/get_started.html Clang Windows Development HOWTO page]. You'll need [http://www.cmake.org/ cmake]. Once done, you'll have a Visual Studio solution with about 113 libraries for llvm and clang.
  # Make a new IWYU .vcproj as part of that solution. Add the IWYU source to the IWYU .vcproj. Add the llvm and clang libraries mentioned in the [http://code.google.com/p/include-what-you-use/source/browse/trunk/Makefile IWYU makefile] to the list of link libraries, changing the suffix from the linux .a to the Windows .lib.
  # Remove/replace linux-isms in the IWYU code that are non portable. Find a getopt replacement for Windows. Replace fnmatch with some other windows code (such as boost filesystem).
  # Build, fix errors, repeat.
  # When running IWYU, you have to put standard C++ headers from cygwin on the include path, as Clang can't handle the non standard C++ constructs in the microsoft standard C++ headers.

A similar approach, which uses MinGW instead of cygwin, is available [http://groups.google.com/group/include-what-you-use/msg/b97a395e92459d41 here].

= How to Run =

The easiest way to run IWYU over your codebase is to run
{{{
   make -k CXX=/path/to/llvm/Debug+Asserts/bin/include-what-you-use
}}}
or
{{{
   make -k CXX=/path/to/llvm/Release/bin/include-what-you-use
}}}

(include-what-you-use always exits with an error code, so the build
system knows it didn't build a .o file.  Hence the need for `-k`.)

We also include, in this directory, a tool that automatically fixes up
your source files based on the iwyu recommendations.  This is also
alpha-quality software!  Here's how to use it (requires python):
{{{
   make -k CXX=/path/to/llvm/Debug+Asserts/bin/include-what-you-use > /tmp/iwyu.out
   python fix_includes.py < /tmp/iwyu.out
}}}
If you don't like the way fix_includes.py munges your #include lines,
you can control its behavior via flags. `fix_includes.py --help` will
give a full list, but these are some common ones:
    * `-b`: Put blank lines between system and Google #includes
    * `--nocomments`: Don't add the 'why' comments next to #includes

WARNING: include-what-you-use only analyzes .cc (or .cpp) files built
by `make`, along with their corresponding .h files.  If your project
has a .h file with no corresponding .cc file, iwyu will ignore it.
include-what-you-use supports the `AddGlobToReportIWYUViolationsFor()`
function which can be used to indicate other files to analyze, but
it's not currently exposed to the user in any way.

= How to Correct IWYU Mistakes =

   # If fix_includes.py has removed an #include you actually need, add it back in with the comment '`// IWYU pragma: keep`' at the end of the #include line.  Note that the comment is case-sensitive.
   # If fix_includes has added an #include you don't need, just take it out.  We hope to come up with a more permanent way of fixing later.
   # If fix_includes has wrongly added or removed a forward-declare, just fix it up manually.
   # If fix_includes has suggested a private header file (such as `<bits/stl_vector.h>`) instead of the proper public header file (`<vector>`), you can fix this by inserting a specially crafted comment near top of the private file (assuming you can write to it): '`// IWYU pragma: private, include "the/public/file.h"`'.  

All current IWYU pragmas (as of July 2012) are described in [IWYUPragmas].